---
layout: post
title: LDX3 London 2025 (Day 1)
date: 2025-07-01
tags: conference leaddev ldx3
permalink: "/2024/08/15/leaddev-london-2024-day-2/"
image: leaddev2025.jpeg
image_title: LDX3 London 2025
---
It's June, so for the fourth time, I was lucky enough to be able to head into London for the annual LeadDev
conference, this time updated and renamed to LDX3. LeadDev is increasingly popular, and had outgrown the
space at the Barbican, so this year was held at the [Intercontinental at the O2](https://iclondon-theo2.com/).
Previous years had separated the LeadDev, Staff+ and Leading Eng tracks, so if you had tickets to one,
you couldn't go and see talks on a different track. This year it was one big conference, so apart from a
separate Director+ area, anyone could see any of the talks.

As a space, the Intercontinental worked ok. The Barbican is a unique venue with a lot of character, so it's
difficult to replace that vibe. The Intercontinental was essentially a giant square hotel ballroom, surrounded
by scrub land (although with a pretty cool view of Canary Wharf). The LeadDev team had done a good job jazzing
up the space with lights and screens but the stage, even for the main Organisational Leadership track, was small
compared to the Barbican, and I definitely missed the lovely comfortable Barbican raked seating with perfect
sightlines from wherever you chose to sit.

<!--more-->

I've previously complained about the toilets at the Barbican, and those facilities were much better at the
Intercontinental. Clean, functional and didn't have to queue for long. However, food was a bit of step back.
With the different tracks breaking at slightly different times if your track finished later then in the morning
and afternoon breaks, you were likely to find all the food already gone. On the first day, there was no food left in the
morning, and in the afternoon break I only found a sad-looking pot of chilli nuts. On day two, I happened to choose an early
breaking track, so I managed to grab a tasty cake.

Lunch was better in that there was generally plenty of food, although I did spend about 10 minutes queuing near a
pile of food because there were no plates available. Seating during lunch is always going to be difficult, and at
the Barbican I usually ate while sitting on the stairs. The Intercontinental was no different. The desserts at lunch
were similar to the breaks, and if you arrived late, you could well miss out.

The conference was split into three main stages: The largest Organisation Leadership stage, the medium-sized
Technical Strategy stage, and the small Ways of Working stage. The LeadDev team underestimated the popularity of
the Ways of Working stage, and on the first day quite a few people failed to get into the room as it was full.
Credit to LeadDev though, by day two they had magiced up a hundred or so headphones and chairs so you could watch
a live stream.

I appreciated the opportunity to pick and choose the talks that suited me best, so I did move around the stages over
the two days. I planned my days to stay at the same stage until a break, and only then move. Unfortunately, a lot of
people switched stages after every talk, which was very disruptive and occasionally disrespectful to the speakers who
were on next. With the single-track conference at the Barbican, you didn't have a choice but to sit there and watch
whoever was on stage. If I were running the conference, next year I would advertise which talks were in each block,
but not give specific timings for them to encourage people to not pick and choose quite so much.

As usual, there was a lot on apart from the main stages, including table talks, workshops, expert coaching and a networking
event. I took part in a workshop, which I'll write about in my round-up of day 2, and the networking mixer, but didn't
take advantage of the rest of the sessions. Away from the talks, the space was extremely busy and a bit overcrowded. It
was not easy to move around. The sponsor hall, in particular, was always packed so I tried to avoid it unless I had no choice.

I think that's enough rambling about the conference, the reason I went was for the talks, so below is my summary of the talks
I saw on day 1 of LDX3 London 2025...

The videos of the talks are available [here](https://leaddev.com/leaddev-london-video-hub) if you sign up with a free LeadDev account.

## Escaping The Rewrite Trap

_[Camille Fournier](https://twitter.com/skamille)_

Opening the conference is a tricky task as you have to set the tone for the rest of the talks. Camille is a LeadDev regular,
and here was covering one of the topics that came up repeatedly over the two days - dealing with technical debt. Camille's
approach was that rewrites almost always fail, but reachitectures succeed. 

The problem is that with any long-lived code base, it's really hard to know what it actually does, so how can be you be sure
you have reimplemented all the required features and logic? [Hyrum's law](https://www.hyrumslaw.com/) states that for a
sufficiently large number of users, any observable behaviour will be depended on by someone - so if your rewrite changes anything,
it will break for someone.

Camille made the point that if you have a large successful system, then the team supporting it is unlikely to be staffed for
novelty. When you're first building a system you have "pioneers", who thrive on the hard work of building something from
scratch, then "settlers" who start scaling it one. Once it's successful, they are replaced by "town planners", who are
adept at maintaining and gradually growing the system. Asking your "town planners" to start from scratch is unlikely to be successful.

To be successful in rearchitecting you need to have, and clearly communicate a vision for the end goal. You need to have long-term
goals, for example "features", "efficiency", "reliability" and "security". Factor in the scale of the company, your rate of growth
and migration costs - can you really afford this? What major things can you acheive in 12 months?

Once you have the plan, sell it to your team and sell it to your stakeholders. Take advantage of external deadlines, such as key
technology going out of support soon.

Finally, Camille covered how to execute the plan. She first warned against bringing in a new hire to run the project. Although
they may "have done this migration before", they won't know the team, the context or the system and will immediately be on the back foot.
You should minimise disruptuon to your users, and work out how to ensure correctness. Can you test without breaking the rest of the
company?

I felt this talk was a great conference opener. It had just the right balance of inspiring, broad topic and actionable suggestions
you can apply to your own role.

## Rethinking Collaboration

_[Sara Dolganov](https://www.linkedin.com/in/sara-dolganov/)_

As with everywhere else, LLMs were a common topic at LDX3. In this talk Sara covered how to use LLMs to help in a variety of work
contexts. She started with covering how LLMs can better structure your CV, and can help tailor a cover letter to the company
you're applying for.

Once you have joined a company she talked about how you can talk to an LLM instead of a rubber duck to help with getting unstuck
while learning the new systems and technologies.

She also warned about where LLMs can make things harder - such as "skills atrophy" while vibe coding, making up facts in your
CV and subverting the narrative if you ask it to rewrite a longer piece of text.

I'm pretty skeptical of AI, and this talk did little to change that.

## How Monzo Tolerates Full Cloud Outages

_[Andrew Lawson](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adlawson) and [Daniel Chatfield](https://leaddev.com/community/daniel-chatfield)_

In this talk, Andrew and Daniel covered how Monzo avoids downtime, even when their primary system is completely unavailable. They
began by talking about some recent large-scale outages. In the last two years nine UK banks have had a combined total of 803 hours
of downtime due to IT outages. They also covered the UK National Air Traffic Control System (NATS) outage where a bad flight plan
took down both their primary system, and because it was running the same code, so had the same bug, the secondary system too.

To avoid this problem, Monzo has what they call a "stand-in". This is not a subset of their core system, but a completely independently
implemented and hosted system that they can switch over to for anywhere between one and all of their users. It consists of 18 services
(compared to 3000+ for their primary), and offers only the core features bank users rely on - checking balances, paying with a card, etc.
It costs just 1% of their cloud spend to run.

They stay in sync by not modifying data in the secondary, but by keeping a list of changes that are then replayed on the primary when
it is available. This avoids issues with the two systems becoming out of sync.

They convinced their executives to allow them to test on real customers, as this is the only way to be sure it works, outside of a major
incident.

This was a really great talk. I thought they could have talked about how similar ideas have been used in aeroplanes and space flight, to
give a bit of context, but regardless, this was a really interesting peek behind the curtain of a nationally critical piece of infrastructure.

## Monolith-ifying Perfectly Good Microservices

_[Brian Scanlan](https://twitter.com/brian_scanlan)_

This talk followed a thread that was common to quite a few talks at LeadDev - that microservices are not a "clearly better, why would you
do anything else?" solution, and instead, you have to weigh the tradeoffs with a monolith. In this talk, Brian described the journey
Intercom went on with their Ruby On Rails monolith.

As is often the way they started with a monolith and scaled rapidly both in terms of team size and infrastructure. They started to suffer
from stability issues, and flaky tests. They suspected that these issues were caused by the inability of Rails to scale, so they began
to build new features in standalone applications and extracted billing from the monolith.

Even with this change in architecture they were still struggling with the monolith and team coordination was being a bigger issue. They focused
on getting good at managing the monolith. They build tools to help with stability and worked on...

  * linting
  * dependency upgrades
  * test reliability and speed
  * code ownership
  * deployment
  * scaling MySQL
  * caching

After all the monolith was working much better, and coordination with the microservices was still a big problem, so they copied code from the services
into their monolith.

## Metrics, KPIs and Developer Experience: Rethinking Measurement For High Performing Teams

_[Oge Opara-Nadi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/oge-oparanadi/)_

This was a great talk, and closely aligned to the challenges I am facing. They began by talking about how metrics are not strategy. Metrics are easy
to measure, but hard to turn into actionable insights. They miss questions such as:

  * are we working on the right things?
  * are we reworking or getting blocked?
  * do developers feel trusted and supported?
  * is our current delivery pace sustainable?

They finished with a challenge. Audit one metric you rely on. What is it really telling you? And who is it serving? Is it helping your team improve?
Is it aligned to your business goals? Is it reinforcing the culture you want to build?

## Beyond "Try Harder": Effective Strategies To Tackle Bugs

_[Andy Weir](https://leaddev.com/community/andy-weir)_

Bugs kill trust, confidence and momentum. If you can build systems that make doing the right thing easier then
the time you spend firefighting will go down, and the business will start trusting you.

This talk didn't have much depth, and the suggestions are pretty obvious.

## Human-first Leadership, AI-Powered

_[Sterling Chin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/sterlingchin/)_

This was quite an interesting AI-based talk as it was a set of tools Sterling uses to make him more efficient manager,
and to allow him to be more present with his team, more present with his family and reduce people's dependency on him.

He started the talk with a confession that he talked for five minutes into his phone and used AI to turn it into an outline
for the talk. Before adopting AI he would wake up with 100s of unread emails and slack messages, which took 1-2 hours per day
to deal with. His family felt the pressure because Sunday evening was Monday morning for his India-based team.

He felt that he was never present in meetings because there no break in between, and not time to context switch. The mental load
of what he was dropping was huge.

Sterling advocates for starting simple - make use of AI transcription and AI meeting summaries. If you had an executive assistant
what would you delegate? An AI should be able to do that.

Use AI to free you up to ask real questions and make real connections rather than tracking sprint goals or other info.

Rather than your team asking you what was decided and waiting for a response they can ask an AI trained on the meeting summaries.

## Fast, Informed, Impactful: How To Master Decision-Making

_[Katrin Freihofner](https://www.linkedin.com/in/katrin-freihofner/)_

## Tracking Repository Health at Scale

_[Simon McManus](https://www.linkedin.com/in/simonmmcmanus/)_

## Code Your Future

_[Germán Bencci](https://twitter.com/gbencci)_

## How To Delete Everything: The Clean-Slate Approach to Technical Strategy

_[Plum Ertz](https://plumertzi.com/)_

## Rebuilding at Scale: A CTO's Journey in a High-Growth Fintech

_[Lee Provoost](https://www.linkedin.com/in/leeprovoost/)_

## Levelling Up: Transitioning Successfully into a Manager of Managers Role

_[Gisela Rossi](https://giselarossi.co.uk/)_

## Frictionless Movement: How Internal Mobility Transforms Engineering Culture

_[Tom Murton](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tommurton/)_

## Lost and Alone over the Pacific

_[Nick Means](https://twitter.com/nmeans)_
